# Description
This protocol is used for simultaneous N6-Methyladenosine (m6A) and pseudouridine (psU, Ψ) sites prediction of nanopore direct RNA sequencing data. There is no minimum input reads requirement but a raw dataset of >1M reads is recommended for the following processing for human transcriptome. For a larger transcriptome, more reads are recommended.

This protocol was tested on a cluster of linux system ("midway2", Scientific Linux 7.2).
# Package versions
The version of softwares and packages:
Name | Version
:---:|---
Python3 | 3.10.10
guppy_basecaller | 3.2.2+9fe0a78 ((C) Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Limited) 
minimap2 | 2.18-r1015
numpy | 1.24.3
pandas | 1.5.2
samtools | 1.11 (Copyright (C) 2020 Genome Research Ltd.)
scikit-learn | 1.2.0
tensorflow | 2.11.1

# Download
You could download the package to your cluster by the following command.
```bash
git clone https://github.com/sihaohuanguc/NanoSPA.git
```
Then go to the folder with the `setup.py` file. And run
```bash
pip3 install .
```
Now you've installed the package. You could use it at any place of your account. If you are not clear about auy command, you could find help by the command
```bash
nanospa -h
```
**Please follow the guidance and obey the rules of your cluster, when running the commands.**

# Reference and citation
You are always welcome to use the package or edit it in your work. If you would like to apply this package in your work, please cite the following publication:

(place holder)

# Protocol
## 1. Base call
You could base call the reads during sequencing. If so, this step is not necessary and go to the next step directly. If the data is not base called, please use the following command to do the base call.
```bash
guppy_basecaller --input_path fast5 \
                 --recursive \
                 --save_path fastq \
                 --records_per_fastq 0 \
                 --flowcell FLO-MIN106 \
                 --kit SQK-RNA002 \
                 --qscore_filtering \
                 --min_qscore 7 \
                 --cpu_threads_per_caller 3 \
                 --num_callers 5
```
"Input_path" is the path of your raw data in fast5 format. "Save_path" is your output fastq folder. "Flowcell" is the type of nanopore flowcell you use. "Kit" is the version of nanopore direct RNA sequencing kit you use. For more kits and flow cells information, please go to the [Oxford Nanopre Technology website](https://nanoporetech.com). Customize "cpu_threads_per_caller" and "num_caller" according to the state of your own cluster. This step is computation intensive.

## 2. Alignment and pile up
To align the reads to the reference and pile up the reads, run the following command
```bash
nanospa alignment -i path/of/fastq/ -r reference.fa -o your/output/path  # output specified
```
or
```bash
nanospa alignment -i path/of/fastq/ -r reference.fa  # output not specified
```
The first argument is the input fastq path. The fastq files must be directly in this folder. The second argument is the genome reference file. You could specific the output path by using `-o` tag. If `-o` tag is omitted, the output will be a folder named `alignment` in your current path. The output is a folder with two subfolders `plus_strand` and `minus_strand`. The two subfolders contains data of reads aligned to forward and reverse strands respectively. This step is computation intensive, which means it's NOT recommended to run the step on the login node of a cluster or on a local computer.

The output report contains the alignment summary generated by minimap2. If everything is correct, you'll get a folder named `alignment` in you current folder and there is a `plus_strand` folder in the `alignment` folder. Check the folder and you'll see the following files.
```bash
$ ls alignment/plus_strand/
collect.bam    collect_pile.txt  collect.sorted.bam  reference.fa.fai
collect.fastq  collect.sam       reference.fa
```
Of course, you could use the `.bam` file or the `_pile.txt` file for analysis by other softwares if you want.

## 3. Feature extraction
Due to the design of samtools, in the mpileup files, the spliced reads will be filled a ">" or "<" in the jumped regions and the coverage and the quality score are affected. The data points with ">" or "<" are not real bases. Run one of the following commands to remove the gap sections in the mpileup file. This step is computation intensive.
```bash
nanospa remove_intron -i your/input/path 
```
or
```bash
nanospa remove_intron
```
You could choose to specify the input path. If input path is not specified, then the script will view `./alignment` as the input. It'll generate a new file named `collect_pile_no_intron.txt` in the `plus_strand` and `minus_strand` folders in your input path.

Then extract features of all sites. In order to make the prediction more reliable, there is a threshold for a site which is 20 reads. Only sites with >20 reads will be processed for following analysis. This step is computation intensive. Run one of the following commands.
```bash
nanospa extract_features -i your/input/path -o your/output/file/name
nanospa extract_features -i your/input/path
nanospa extract_features -o your/output/file/name
nanospa extract_features
```
You could choose to specify the input path and/or output file name. If input path is not specified, then the script will view `./alignment` as the input. If the output file name is not specified, the output file will be `features.csv` in your input or `./alignment` folder, according to your input. This file contains information from reads aligned to both forward and reverse strands.

For m6A, an additional step is needed to select the A sites within specific motif and then extract their features. Run one of the following commands.
```bash
nanospa preprocess_m6A -i your/input/file/name -o your/output/file/name
nanospa preprocess_m6A -i your/input/file/name
nanospa preprocess_m6A -o your/output/file/name
nanospa preprocess_m6A
```
You could choose to specify the input and/or output file name. If input file name is not specified, then the script will view `./alignment/features.csv` as the input. If the output file name is not specified, the output file will be `features_GGACU.csv` in the same folder as your input file or `./alignment` folder, according to your input. The output file contains information from reads aligned to both forward and reverse strands.

## 4. psU prediction
To predict the psU probability of all the U sites, run one of the following commands.
```bash
nanospa prediction_psU -i your/input/file/name -o your/output/file/name
nanospa prediction_psU -i your/input/file/name
nanospa prediction_psU -o your/output/file/name
nanospa prediction_psU
```
You could choose to specify the input and/or output file name. If input file name is not specified, then the script will view `./alignment/features.csv` as the input. If the output file name is not specified, the output file will be `prediction_psU.csv` in the same folder as your input file or `./alignment` folder, according to your input. Each row contains the reference strand, position on the reference strand (sites on (-) strand have its index on (-) strand), base type, coverage and psU probability.

## 5. m6A prediction
To predict the m6A probability of all the A sites within GGACU motif, run one of the following commands.
```bash
nanospa prediction_m6A -i your/input/file/name -o your/output/file/name
nanospa prediction_m6A -i your/input/file/name
nanospa prediction_m6A -o your/output/file/name
nanospa prediction_m6A
```
You could choose to specify the input and/or output file name. If input file name is not specified, then the script will view `./alignment/features_GGACU.csv` as the input. If the output file name is not specified, the output file will be `prediction_m6A.csv` in the same folder as your input file or `./alignment` folder, according to your input. Each row contains the reference strand, position on the reference strand (sites on (-) strand have its index on (-) strand), base type, coverage and m6A probability.

